---
title: This Blog Post is in the Library of Babel
date: 2024-02-24 14:56
---
[Read the post here](https://libraryofbabel.app/ref/@320e2f1eecebba445b8b4bf3de7aa02803400eaeaf5fcee97114a41c10d0f7eb.4.5.4.1)

[The mentioned youtube link](https://youtu.be/_0IVVw7g23o)

If the link dies, download the full reference below and copy it into the [libraryofbabel.app browser.](https://libraryofbabel.app/browse)  
[Download the Full Reference Here.](/assets/posts/library-of-babel/full_index.txt)

{% comment %}
this blog post is in the library of babel.

the library of babel is a fascinating topic. the core idea is that any combination of lowercase letters, commas, periods, and spaces exists within it. it is based on a short story by argentine author jorge luis borges. it describes an entire universe, consisting of nothing but the library. the library is made up of arbitrarily many hexes, each containing twenty bookshelves, five on each of four walls. each shelf contains thirty two books, each book of which contains four hundred and ten pages. each page holds forty lines, each line being approximately eighty characters long. thus each page holds three thousand two hundred characters, and each book contains one million three hundred and twelve thousand characters. from here, we have the premise. given twenty five possible characters, made up of twenty two lower case letters, spaces, and commas, the library of babel contains each and every possible book that could be constructed from combinations of those characters. there is a book whose every page is nothing but the letter a. there is that same book, save that the final character is a b instead. it contains the story of your life. it contains false stories of your life. it contains the moment of your death, if only you can find it. it also contains pages filled with ascii art of bad apple, see the youtube link on the original page.

some clever readers will notice that the library borges wrote of only has twenty two letters, while our english alphabet has twenty six letters, and spanish, the language of the original story, contains thirty. borges described his ideal twenty two letter alphabet in an essay titled ,the total library, which ended up being something of a precursor to the library of babel. to reach this ideal, he stripped the double letters ch, ll, and rr from spanish, deeming them unnecessary. he also removed the enyay, leaving him with, effectively, the english alphabet. he then stripped out k and w, as they only appeared in loan words, then removed q, describing it as superfluous, and x, deeming it an abbreviation. these decisions are... interesting, in my opinion. borges seemingly had something a change of heart between the writing of the essay and the story, as the twenty five character limit is used to comment that even the platonic ideal of the totality of all possible human communication is still, in some ways, insufficient.

thankfully, the online version of the library you are reading this on has decided to ignore this limitation, opting instead for the full twenty six letters of the english alphabet, alongside the commas, spaces, and periods that borges includes, but also adding exclamation marks, question marks, and hyphens. it also opts for exactitude, with each line being exactly 80 monospaced characters. because i found this version later into the writing of this text, much of my math is done with the assumption of twenty nine characters. it is also based on a page based pseudo library, as i explain below.

there is another version, that is more popular, at libraryofbabel.info. however, due to technical limitations, it is only a pseudo library of babel. where the original contains every possible book, that website strives instead to have every possible page. while this drastically reduces the implicit redundancy, it also presents some limitations when using it, as only three thousand two hundred characters worth of space are available to writers, rather than the original one million. however, the size of the library is still massive. a pseudo library of babel must contain twenty nine to the power of three thousand two hundred pages, as each and every permutation of characters must appear within. this library is, however, still extremely redundant, as their system for hex organization names hexes in base thirty six, with up to three thousand two hundred sixty characters per hex name. this means that there are actually more hexes than there are pages in this library. this redundancy is actually quite easily seen by choosing a random page, copying its contents, and searching for it. this likely will show you a page in a completely different area than where you started.  

while this is an interesting result of the algorithmic pseudo random nature of that iteration, i am interested in the platonic ideal. in the smallest possible pseudo library of babel. if the math is done, there are four times ten to the power of four thousand six hundred and seventy nine different pages within this library. with each hex containing a mere two hundred sixty two thousand four hundred pages, the number of hexes is only reduced by five powers of ten, hardly bringing it into the scale of conceivable numbers. if we wanted to index each hex, it would therefore require four thousand six hundred and seventy five decimal digits. 

in the original concept for this post, each page in the post would direct the reader to the next page. due to the fact that numbers are used in the definition of the hex names, and that hex names can be longer than the length of the page itself, that idea was scrapped. however, looking at some of the math prompted me to ask the question, could a theoretical optimally efficient library of babel hold an index to a following element in sequence. i use element as a stand in for both book and page, as mathematically it does not really matter. we should begin by defining the three variables i use. first is c, which represents the number of characters. this is important for determining the number of elements. second is l, which represents the length of the element in characters. again, this is important for determining the number of elements. finally we have s, which stands for the size of the hex, in elements. the first thing that needs to be determined is whether finding the hex is possible in the space allotted. we are going to assume that one character must be reserved as a separator for this index. we can easily find the number of hexes by taking c to the power of l divided by s. the length of a decimal number is one plus the base ten log of the number. then, to convert the lengths of numbers between bases, multiply the length of the number by the ratio of the log of the starting base divided by the log of the converted base. in this case, the ratio would be log of ten divided by log of c minus one. taking all this into account, the only way the hex index is smaller than the length is if s is larger than ten times the ratio of c to power of l divided by c minus one to the power of l. this functionally means that without extremely large hexes, for either page based libraries or book based libraries, it is not always possible to even point to a specific hex, much less a specific other book. 

when i first learned this, i was quite surprised, because it broke an assumption i had about the library of babel. when i first learned of the library, i had always assumed that if a particular work was too long to fit into a book in the library of babel, then it could always end with the index of the following book. after realizing this impossibility, i realized that the impossibility is in and of itself quite logical. because each book in the library is unique, each one must uniquely define itself. for a while, this perturbed me and saddened me. does this mean that some stories are so long that they are impossible to follow? yes. but those stories are rare, and most often are organized into subcategories in the real world too. the guiness world record longest novel is a la recherche du temps perdu, written by marcel proust, with an estimated nine million six hundred and nine characters, including spaces. however, in the real world, it is subdivided into thirteen volumes, each one well within the limits of a book of the library. some readers may know of the infamous fanfiction, the subspace emissarys worlds conquest, which currently stands at over four million words. it was known for some time as the longest english work of fiction, though that crown was lost some years ago to a kantai collection fanfic titled ambience - a fleet symphony, which currently stands at over four and a half million words. given the average number of characters in an english word is a bit over four, we can roughly estimate that each of these have over sixteen million characters. but, again, this is not the experience that most will have with it. they are published in separate chapters, with ambience having over four hundred chapters, and worlds conquest standing at around two hundred. each of these chapters will have their own book, and while it would be nigh impossible to find them all, it would be almost impossible even with an index due to the size of the library, as well as the fact that there would also be millions of novels containing misinformation as to the following index.

the library of babel is an incredibly deep topic. it intersects mathematics, language, and philosophy, and while mathematics is my primary wheelhouse, and thus the lens through which i tend to analyze it, the other aspects fascinate me. some choose to use it just by flipping to random pages, hoping to stumble across something interesting. some use it to create art. im choosing to use it to host a very small part of my blog. but i could always convert everything here into links to the library. because this blog post, and the entire blog, is contained within the library of babel.

#### Note to self, don't forget to run it through fmt -w 80 if a rebuild is needed.
{% endcomment %}
