---
title: This Blog Post is in the Library of Babel
---
this blog post is in the library of babel.

the library of babel is a fascinating topic. the core idea is that any combination of lowercase letters, commas, periods, and spaces exists within it. it is based on a short story by argentine author jorge luis borges. it describes an entire universe, consisting of nothing but the library. the library is made up of arbitrarily many hexes, each containing twenty bookshelves, five on each of four walls. each shelf contains thirty two books, each book of which contains four hundred and ten pages. each page holds forty lines, each line being approximately eighty characters long. thus each page holds three thousand two hundred characters, and each book contains one million three hundred and twelve thousand characters. from here, we have the premise. given twenty five possible characters, made up of twenty two lower case letters, spaces, and commas, the library of babel contains each and every possible book that could be constructed from combinations of those characters. there is a book whose every page is nothing but the letter a. there is that same book, save that the final character is a b instead. 

some clever readers will notice that the library borges wrote of only has twenty two letters, while our english alphabet has twenty six letters, and spanish, the language of the original story, contains thirty. borges described his ideal twenty two letter alphabet in an essay titled ,the total library, which ended up being something of a precursor to the library of babel. to reach this ideal, he stripped the double letters ch, ll, and rr from spanish, deeming them unnecessary. he also removed the enyay, leaving him with, effectively, the english alphabet. he then stripped out k and w, as they only appeared in loan words, then removed q, describing it as superfluous, and x, deeming it an abbreviation. these decisions are... interesting, in my opinion. borges seemingly had something a change of heart between the writing of the essay and the story, as the twenty five character limit is used to comment that even the platonic ideal of the totality of all possible human communication is still, in some ways, insufficient.

thankfully, the online version of the library you are reading this on has decided to ignore this limitation, opting instead for the full twenty six letters of the english alphabet, alongside commas, spaces, and periods. it also opts for exactitude, with each line being exactly 80 monospaced characters. this online version, however, is still only a pseudo library of babel. where the original contains every possible book, this website strives instead to have every possible page. while this drastically reduces the implicit redundancy, it also presents some limitations when using it, as only three thousand two hundred characters worth of space are available to writers, rather than the original one million. however, the size of the library is still massive. a pseudo library of babel must contain twenty nine to the power of three thousand two hundred pages, as each and every permutation of characters must appear within. this library is, however, still extremely redundant, as their system for hex organization names hexes in base 36, with up to 3260 characters per hex name. this means that there are actually more hexes than there are pages in this library. this redundancy is actually quite easily seen by choosing a random page, copying its contents, and searching for it. this likely will show you a page in a completely different area than where you started.  

while this is an interesting result of the algorithmic pseudo random nature of this iteration, i am interested in the platonic ideal. in the smallest possible library of babel. if the math is done, there are four times ten to the power of four thousand six hundred and seventy nine different pages within this library. with each hex containing a mere two hundred sixty two thousand four hundred pages, the number of hexes is only reduced by five powers of ten, hardly bringing it into the scale of conceivable numbers. if we wanted to index each hex, it would therefore require four thousand six hundred and seventy five decimal digits. 

in the original concept for this post, each page in the post would direct the reader to the next page. due to the fact that numbers are used in the definition of the hex names, and that hex names can be longer than the length of the page itself, that idea was scrapped. however, looking at some of the math prompted me to ask the question, could a theoretical optimally efficient library of babel hold an index to a following element in sequence. i use element as a stand in for both book and page, as mathematically it doesnt really matter. we should begin by defining the three variables i use. first is c, which represents the number of characters. this is important for determining the number of elements. second is l, which represents the length of the element in characters. again, this is important for determining the number of elements. finally we have s, which stands for the size of the hex, in elements. the first thing that needs to be determined is whether finding the hex is possible in the space allotted. we are going to assume that one character must be reserved as a separator for this index. we can easily find the number of hexes by taking c to the power of l divided by s. the length of a decimal number is one plus the base ten log of the number. then, to convert the lengths of numbers between bases, multiply the length of the number by the ratio of the log of the starting base divided by the log of the converted base. in this case, the ratio would be log of ten divided by log of c minus one. taking all this into account, the only way the hex index is smaller than the length is if s is larger than ten times the ratio of c to power of l divided by c minus one to the power of l. this functionally means that without extremely large hexes, for either page based libraries or book based libraries, it is not always possible to even point to a specific hex, much less a specific other book. 

when i first learned this, i was quite surprised, because it broke an assumption i had about the library of babel. when i first learned of the library, i had always assumed that if a particular work was too long to fit into a book

it also contains every story that ever has been and every story that ever will be written, so long as it fits within the limits of the page.

https://libraryofbabel.info/bookmark.cgi?final.page
https://libraryofbabel.info/bookmark.cgi?final.page:1
https://libraryofbabel.info/bookmark.cgi?all.a

https://libraryofbabel.app/ref/508aca1f-bafb-4d62-ac8c-dc836a6b3650.4.5.13.1